# ABC interpreter

This repository contains the following:

- An optimiser (`abcopt`) for the ABC language (the intermediate target
  language of Clean), which removes redundant blocks of code and generates a
  number of specialised instructions which are not in standard ABC.
- A bytecode generator (`bcgen`) which generates a binary format of the
  optimised ABC language.
- A bytecode linker (`bclink`) which links several bytecode files together into
  one.
- A bytecode stripper (`bcstrip`) which removes any dead code and all symbol
  names from a bytecode file.
- An interpreter (`interpret`) which can run bytecode files.
- A graphical debugger (`debug`) to debug bytecode files.
- A Clean library (`ABC.Interpreter`) around GraphCopy and the interpreter
  which allows for cross-platform (de)serialization of lazy expressions.

## Usage

### Cross-platform (de)serialization

Currently, the main goal of this project is to allow cross-platform
serialization of arbitrary Clean expressions. To use it like this, you have to
grab the following [nightlies][]:

- clean-abc-interpreter
- clean-base
- clean-lib-graphcopy

This includes the tools to generate bytecode, a new version of `cpm` / the
Clean IDE that interacts with these tools, and the libraries needed for
(de)serialization.

You need to set the following project settings to generate bytecode for a Clean
program:

- `ByteCode`: path for the main bytecode file (e.g. `{Project}*app.bc`)
- `CodeGen/GenerateByteCode`: `True`
- `CodeGen/OptimiseABC`: `True` (unless you suspect a bug in the ABC optimiser)
- `Link/StripByteCode`: `False` in most use cases

In the Clean IDE, you can set these in Project Options &gt; Bytecode.

See the documentation in [ABC.Interpreter](/src/ABC/Interpreter.dcl) for more
details about the serialization library itself.

### Independent interpretation

The interpreter can also be used stand-alone to run Clean programs. The
interpreter is not included in the nightly builds, so besides the nightlies
mentioned above you need to build it:

```bash
git clone https://gitlab.science.ru.nl/clean-and-itasks/abc-interpreter
cd abc-interpreter
make -C src optimized interpret
```

This generates the file `src/interpret` which you can then use to run the
bytecode files generated by `cpm` (see the previous step):

```bash
./src/interpret path/to/application.bc
```

### Debugging

The graphical debugger can be used to debug Clean/ABC programs. It relies on
the CURSES library. You need to build the debugger yourself:

```bash
git clone https://gitlab.science.ru.nl/clean-and-itasks/abc-interpreter
cd abc-interpreter
make -C src debug
```

Generate the bytecode as usual (without stripping it), then use:

```bash
./src/debug path/to/application.bc
```

For help on the interface, press <kbd>?</kbd> in the debugger GUI.

[nightlies]: https://ftp.cs.ru.nl/Clean/builds/
